UNKNOTTING GENUS ONE KNOTS
ALEXANDER COWARD AND MARC LACKENBY

arXiv:0809.4142v3 [math.GT] 15 May 2009

1. Introduction
There is no known algorithm for determining whether a knot has unknotting number
one, practical or otherwise. Indeed, there are many explicit knots (11328 for example)
that are conjectured to have unknotting number two, but for which no proof of this fact
is currently available. For many years, the knot 810 was in this class, but a celebrated
application of Heegaard Floer homology by Ozsváth and Szabó [7] established that its
unknotting number is in fact two.
In this paper, we examine a related question: if a knot has unknotting number one,
are there only finitely many ways to unknot it, and if so, can one find them? This is
also a very difficult problem. However, we answer it completely here for knots with
genus one. We prove, in fact, that there is at most one way to unknot a genus one
knot, with the exception of the figure-eight knot, which admits precisely two unknotting
procedures.
We now make this statement more precise. To perform a crossing change to a
knot K, one proceeds as follows. A crossing circle is a simple closed curve C in the
complement of K which bounds a disc that intersects K transversely in two points of
opposite sign. If we perform ±1 surgery along C, then K is transformed into a new
knot by changing a crossing. A crossing change is unknotting if the resulting knot is the
unknot. Two crossing changes are equivalent if the surgery coefficients are the same and
there is an ambient isotopy, keeping K fixed throughout, that takes one crossing circle
to the other.
K

+1 surgery
along C

K

crossing
circle C

Figure 1: a crossing change
Theorem 1.1. Suppose that K is a knot with genus one and unknotting number
one. Then, if K is not the figure-eight knot, there is precisely one crossing change that
unknots K, up to equivalence. If K is the figure-eight knot, then there are precisely two
unknotting crossing changes, up to equivalence.
1

It is possible to be rather more explicit about the crossing changes described above.
It is a theorem of Scharlemann and Thompson [9] that a knot has unknotting number
one and genus one if and only if it is a doubled knot. To construct the latter, one starts
with the knot in the solid torus shown in Figure 2, and then one embeds the solid torus
into the 3-sphere. The result is a doubled knot, provided it is non-trivial. If the solid
torus is unknotted, then the resulting knot is known as a twist knot, again provided it
is non-trivial.

Figure 2: a doubled knot
Theorem 1.2. If K is a doubled knot, but not the figure-eight knot, then the unique
crossing circle that specifies an unknotting crossing change is as shown in Figure 3.
The two non-isotopic crossing circles that specify unknotting crossing changes for the
figure-eight knot are also shown in Figure 3.

unknotting crossing circles

Figure 3
Theorem 1.2 is a rapid consequence of Theorem 1.1. This is because the crossing
circles in Figure 3 do indeed result in unknotting crossing changes. In the case of the
figure-eight knot, the two crossing circles can easily be verified to be non-isotopic. There
are several ways to prove this. One method is to show that they have distinct geodesic
representatives in the hyperbolic structure on the figure-eight knot complement, and
so are not even freely homotopic. Alternatively, observe that the surgery coefficients
are distinct for these two curves, and at most one choice of surgery coefficient along
a crossing circle can result in an unknotting crossing change [8, Theorem 5.1]. Hence,
2

these crossing circles cannot be ambient isotopic, via an isotopy that fixes the figureeight knot throughout. Thus, by Theorem 1.1, these are the only unknotting crossing
circles.
The case of the trefoil knot might, at first, be slightly worrying. It appears to have
three crossing circles that specify unknotting crossing changes, as shown in Figure 4.
However, these are all, in fact, equivalent. This can be seen directly. It will also follow
from the analysis in Section 6.

Figure 4: unknotting crossing circles for the trefoil
Theorems 1.1 and 1.2 are proved by extending some of the known techniques for
detecting unknotting number one knots. It is a theorem of Scharlemann and Thompson
[9, Proposition 3.1] that if a knot has unknotting number one, then it has a minimal
genus Seifert surface that is obtained by plumbing two surfaces, one of which is a Hopf
band (see Figure 5). Moreover, the crossing change that unknots the knot has the
effect of untwisting this band. It is known that a knot K which is not a satellite
knot has, up to ambient isotopy that fixes K, only finitely many minimal genus Seifert
surfaces [12]. Thus, one is led to the following problem: can a minimal genus Seifert
surface be obtained by plumbing a Hopf band in infinitely many distinct ways, up to
ambient isotopy that leaves the surface invariant? Slightly surprisingly, the answer to
this question is ‘yes’. However, it is quite possible for different plumbings to result in
the same crossing change. The analysis for arbitrary knots quickly becomes difficult,
but when the knot has genus one, then progress can be made. In fact, for most doubled
knots, it is fairly straightforward to show that there is a unique way to unknot it. It
turns out that the difficult case is when the knot is fibred. There are precisely two fibred
knots with genus one: the figure-eight and the trefoil. To prove the theorem in these
cases seems to require an analysis of the arc complex of the once-punctured torus.
Given the finiteness result in Theorem 1.1, it is natural to enquire whether it extends
to higher genus knots. It seems reasonable to make the following conjecture.
Conjecture 1.3. For any given knot K, there are only finitely many crossing changes
that unknot K, up to equivalence.
3

Theorem 1.1 can be viewed as positive evidence for this. Further support comes
from the following result, of the second author (Theorem 1.1 of [3]). It deals with
generalised crossing changes of order q, where q ∈ N, which are defined to be the result
of ±1/q surgery along a crossing circle.
Theorem 1.4. For any given knot K, there are only finitely many generalised crossing
changes of order q, where q > 1, that unknot K, up to equivalence.
However, there is still some reason to cautious about Conjecture 1.3. It can be
viewed as the knot-theoretic analogue to the following problem: does a given closed
orientable 3-manifold admit only finitely many descriptions as surgery along a knot in
3-sphere? Examples due to Osoinach [6] show that the answer to this question can be
‘no’.

S1

S2

B1

B2

Figure 5: plumbing
Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Peter Horn and Jessica Banks for pointing
out errors in early versions of this paper. The second author was supported by an
EPSRC Advanced Research Fellowship.
4

2. Plumbing and clean product discs
We now recall the operation of plumbing in detail. Suppose that S1 and S2 are
compact orientable surfaces embedded in 3-balls B1 and B2 . Suppose that the intersection of each Si with ∂Bi is a square I × I such that (I × I) ∩ ∂S1 = I × ∂I and
(I × I) ∩ ∂S2 = ∂I × I. Then the surface in S 3 obtained by plumbing S1 and S2 is
constructed by gluing the boundaries of B1 and B2 so that the two copies of I × I are
identified in a way that preserves their product structures. (See Figure 5.)
Suppose that a surface S can be obtained by plumbing in two ways, by combining
S1 ⊂ B1 with S2 ⊂ B2 , and by combining S1′ ⊂ B1′ with S2′ ⊂ B2′ . We say that these
are equivalent if there exists an ambient isotopy of the 3-sphere, leaving S invariant
throughout, that takes Si to Si′ (i = 1, 2) and Bi to Bi′ (i = 1, 2).
Suppose that S1 is a Hopf band, which is an unknotted annulus embedded in B1
with a full twist. Then we will focus on some associated structure. The associated
crossing disc D is a disc embedded in the interior of B1 which intersects S1 in a single
essential arc in the interior of D. The boundary of this disc is the associated crossing
circle. (See Figure 6.)

Hopf
band

B1

S1

crossing
circle
crossing
disc

Figure 6
The following results are due to Scharlemann and Thompson [9, Proposition 3.1
and Corollary 3.2], and are proved using sutured manifold theory [8].
Theorem 2.1. Let C be a crossing circle for a non-trivial knot K such that performing
a crossing change along C unknots K. Then K has a minimal genus Seifert surface
which is obtained by plumbing surfaces S1 and S2 , where S1 is a Hopf band. Moreover,
there is an ambient isotopy, keeping K fixed throughout, that takes C to the associated
crossing circle for S1 .
5

Corollary 2.2. A knot has unknotting number one and genus one if and only if it is a
doubled knot.
We now introduce some terminology.
Let S be a Seifert surface for a knot K. Let N (S) be a small product neighbourhood
S × I. Let S− and S+ denote the two components of S × ∂I.
A product disc is a disc properly embedded in S 3 − int(N (S)) that intersects ∂S × I
in two vertical arcs. It therefore intersects S− in an arc and S+ in an arc. A direction
on a product disc D is a choice of one of the arcs D ∩ S− or D ∩ S+ . When such an arc
is chosen, we say that the product disc is directed towards that arc, or just directed.
A product disc D is clean if the projections of S− ∩ D and S+ ∩ D to S have disjoint
interiors, up to ambient isotopy of S 3 − int(N (S)) that fixes ∂S × I throughout.
Note that if S is obtained by plumbing S1 and S2 , where S1 is a Hopf band, then
there is an associated directed clean product disc D for S, defined as follows. The
intersection of N (S) with B1 is an unknotted solid torus. There is a unique product
disc embedded within B1 , as shown in Figure 7, which is clean and which intersects S−
and S+ in essential arcs. We direct D by choosing the arc of D ∩ S− and D ∩ S+ that
avoids S2 . Note that D is essential, in the sense that it forms a compression disc for
∂N (S) in S 3 − int(N (S)). Also note that if D is directed towards the arc α, then the
crossing circle associated with the plumbing runs along α just above S, then around K,
then along α just below S and then back around K.

clean product
disc

S

B

1

1

Figure 7
The projection of D ∩S− and D ∩S+ to S is two arcs α− and α+ . We note that they
have the following behaviour near ∂S. A regular neighbourhood of α+ is a thickened

6

arc, and we note that α− intersects both sides of this thickened arc. Equivalently, α+
intersects both sides of a regular neighbourhood of α− . When this is the case, we say
that the arcs and the product disc are alternating (see Figure 8). Note that a clean
alternating product disc is automatically essential.

K

aa-

a+

S
K

Figure 8: alternating arcs
The following is the main result of this section.
Theorem 2.3. Let S be a Seifert surface for a knot K. Then there is a one-one
correspondence between the following:
(i) decompositions of S, up to equivalence, as the plumbing of two surfaces, where the
first surface is a Hopf band;
(ii) clean alternating directed product discs for S, up to ambient isotopy that leaves
N (S) invariant and maintains the disc as a product disc throughout.
Proof. We have already described how a plumbing of two surfaces as in (i) determines a
clean alternating directed product disc. Let us now determine how a clean alternating
directed product disc D can be used to specify S as the plumbing of two surfaces, the
first of which is a Hopf band.
Extend D a little so that its boundary is α− ∪ α+ in S. Suppose that D is directed
towards α+ . Let B be a small regular neighbourhood of α+ in S 3 . (See Figure 9.) We
may ensure that B intersects S in a single disc D+ , such that D+ ∩ K is two properly
embedded arcs in B. We may also ensure that B ∩ D is a single disc, and that cl(D − B)
is a disc D ′ . Note that D ′ ∩ S is a sub-arc of α− . Thicken D ′ a little to form D ′ × I.
We may ensure that S ∩ ∂B is an I-fibre in D ′ × I, because α− and α+ are alternating.
Then, B ∪(D ′ ×I) is a 3-ball B1 . This will be one of the 3-balls involved in the plumbing
operation. The other 3-ball B2 is the closure of the complement of B1 .
We now verify that this is indeed a plumbing construction. We must check that
∂B1 ∩ S is a disc I × I with the correct properties. By construction, ∂B1 ∩ S is a disc.
Identify this with I × I, so that ∂I × I is the intersection with ∂B. Then, near ∂I × I,
S runs into B1 , whereas near I × ∂I, S goes into B2 . Thus, this is indeed a plumbing
7

operation.
We must check that B1 ∩ S is a Hopf band. Note that B1 ∩ S is (I × I) ∪ D+ , which
is an annulus A. A regular neighbourhood of this annulus is a solid torus, the boundary
of which compresses in B1 via a subdisc of D. Thus, A is unknotted. It has exactly one
full twist because D intersects each component of A ∩ K in exactly one point (which is
one of the points of ∂α+ ). Thus, this is indeed a plumbing of two surfaces as described
in (i).

K

a

IxI
-

a

a

+

-

IxI
B

K

Figure 9
Finally, note that this does set up a one-one correspondence between (i) and (ii).
This is because an ambient isotopy of the clean product disc, that leaves S invariant,
clearly results in an equivalent plumbing. Conversely, equivalent plumbings result in
isotopic clean product discs.
Remark 2.4. This theorem implies that if a Seifert surface S for a knot K decomposes
as a plumbing of two surfaces, where the first surface is a Hopf band, then it does so
in two ways which are inequivalent. To see this, note that the plumbing determines a
clean alternating directed product disc D by (i) → (ii) of the theorem. Now consider
the same disc D but with the opposite direction. By (ii) → (i), we get a new way of
describing S as two plumbed surfaces. Associated with these two ways of constructing
S via plumbing, there are two crossing circles. These are actually ambient isotopic, via
an isotopy that fixes K throughout. This is verified as follows. The first crossing circle
runs along one arc α+ of S ∩ D just above S, around K, then back along α+ below S,
then back around K. The second crossing circle follows a similar route, but following
the other arc α− of S ∩ D. The arcs α+ and α− are ambient isotopic, via an isotopy
keeping K fixed throughout, since one may slide α+ across D onto α− . This induces an
isotopy taking the first crossing circle to the second.
8

3. Fibred knots
When K is a fibred knot, the following elementary observation allows us to translate
the existence of a clean product disc into information about the monodromy of the
fibration.
Proposition 3.1. Let K be a fibred knot with fibre S. Let h: S → S be the monodromy, where h|∂S is the identity. Then, there is a one-one correspondence between
the following:
(i) clean essential product discs for S, up to ambient isotopy that leaves N (S) invariant
and maintains the disc as a product disc throughout;
(ii) properly embedded essential arcs α in S, up to isotopy of α in S, such that h(α) and
α can be ambient isotoped, keeping their boundaries fixed, so that their interiors
are disjoint.
Moreover, the product disc is alternating if and only if α and h(α) are alternating.
Proof. Since K is fibred, the exterior of S is a copy of S × I, where S × ∂I = S− ∪ S+ .
It is straightforward that any essential product disc can be isotoped so that it respects
the product structure on S × I. In other words, it is of the form α × I, for some properly
embedded essential arc α in S. Thus, α × {1} is identified with h(α) × {0}. If the disc
is clean, then these arcs can be isotoped so that their interiors are disjoint. Conversely,
from any properly embedded essential arc α as in (ii), one can construct a clean essential
product disc from α × I.
We note the following consequence of Proposition 3.1.
Corollary 3.2. Let K be a hyperbolic fibred knot with fibre S. Suppose that S is
obtained by plumbing two surfaces, the first of which is a Hopf band. Then it does so
in infinitely many inequivalent ways.
Proof. Let h be the monodromy of the fibration. Since S is obtained by plumbing two
surfaces, the first of which is a Hopf band, Theorem 2.3 states that it admits a clean
alternating product disc, which is automatically essential. Then, by Proposition 3.1,
there is a properly embedded essential arc α in S such that h(α) and α have disjoint
interiors, up to isotopy in S, and are alternating. But now consider the arcs hn (α) and
hn+1 (α), for each integer n. These also have disjoint interiors, up to isotopy in S, and
are alternating. Since K is hyperbolic, the monodromy h is pseudo-Anosov and so the
arcs hn (α) are all distinct, up to isotopy. Thus, by Theorem 2.3 and Proposition 3.1,
there are infinitely many distinct ways to decompose S as the plumbing of two surfaces,
the first of which is a Hopf band.
9

As a consequence of the above proof, we make the following definitions.
Let h: S → S be a homeomorphism of a compact surface S. We say that two arcs
α1 and α2 on S are h-equivalent if hn (α1 ) is ambient isotopic to α2 for some integer n.
This is clearly an equivalence relation.
Now let K be a fibred knot with fibre S, and let h be the monodromy. We say
that two arcs on S are monodromy-equivalent if they are h-equivalent. We say that
two clean essential directed product discs D1 and D2 are monodromy-equivalent if the
directed product disc (hn × id)(D1 ) is ambient isotopic to D2 , for some integer n, via
an isotopy that preserves direction. Here, hn × id is a homeomorphism S × I → S × I.
If these directed product discs are alternating, each one determines, by Theorem 2.3,
a plumbing of S into two surfaces, the first of which is Hopf band. We also say that
these two plumbings are monodromy-equivalent. Note that there is an ambient isotopy,
leaving K fixed throughout, taking one plumbing decomposition to the other. This
isotopy slides S around the fibration. In particular, S is not invariant. Nevertheless, we
note that the associated crossing circles are ambient isotopic, via an isotopy that leaves
K fixed throughout.
4. Seifert surfaces for doubled knots
According to Theorem 2.1, if a knot K has unknotting number one, then some
minimal genus Seifert surface for K is of a special form. If, in addition, K has genus
one, then it is a doubled knot. It will therefore be useful to know the following.
Proposition 4.1. Let K be a doubled knot. Then K has a unique genus one Seifert
surface, up to ambient isotopy that fixes K throughout, that is constructed by plumbing
two surfaces, one of which is a Hopf band.
Note that we are not claiming that the doubled knot K has a unique genus one
Seifert surface. Indeed, this is not true in general, as Lyon showed in [5] that a certain
double of the (3, 4) torus knot has two distinct Seifert surfaces with genus one. However,
by the above proposition, only one of these decomposes as the plumbing of two surfaces,
one of which is a Hopf band.
Proof. Suppose that K has a genus one Seifert surface S that is obtained by plumbing
surfaces S1 and S2 , where S1 is a Hopf band. Then S2 is an annulus. Let D be the
clean product disc described in Section 2. Then a regular neighbourhood of N (S) ∪ D is
a solid torus V , with boundary T that lies in the complement of K. Inside V , the knot
K is as shown in Figure 2. Note that V − int(N (K)) is homeomorphic to the exterior
of the Whitehead link. This is hyperbolic, and so contains no essential tori or annuli.
10

We may assume that V is embedded in the 3-sphere in a knotted fashion. Otherwise,
K is a twist knot and by [4], twist knots have a unique genus one Seifert surface, up
to ambient isotopy that fixes the knot throughout. Thus, T is an essential torus in the
complement of K.
Suppose now that K has another genus one Seifert surface S ′ that is obtained by
plumbing two surfaces, one of which is a Hopf band. Then, we obtain another solid torus
V ′ containing K in the same way, with boundary T ′ . Since T and T ′ are incompressible
in the complement of K and since V − int(N (K)) contains no essential annuli, there is
an ambient isotopy of T ′ in the complement of K which renders it disjoint from T . By
switching the roles of T and T ′ if necessary, we may assume that T ′ lies in V . Since
V − int(N (K)) contains no essential tori, we deduce that T ′ is parallel to T . Hence,
after a further small isotopy, we can ensure that V ′ = V . Then V contains both Seifert
surfaces S and S ′ .
The final step in the proof is to show that V contains a unique genus one Seifert
surface for K, up to ambient isotopy that keeps K fixed throughout. This is proved
in Sections 4 and 5 of [11], for example. Briefly, a proof runs as follows. Let D ′ be a
compression disc for T in V that intersects S in a single embedded arc α in the interior of
D ′ , running between the two points of D ′ ∩K. We may pick D ′ so that it is disjoint from
the clean product disc D for S. By ambient isotoping S ′ in V , keeping K fixed, we may
arrange that D ′ ∩ S ′ is a collection of properly embedded simple closed curves and an arc
α′ in the interior of D ′ running between the two points of D ′ ∩ K. We may also ensure
that the intersection between α and S ′ is D ′ ∩ K. Now, by construction, α is a properly
embedded essential arc in S. Also, α′ is properly embedded and essential in S ′ . For if
it were inessential, the resulting disc in S ′ could be used to provide an ambient isotopy
of K in V that would render it disjoint from D ′ , which is impossible. The exterior of α′
in S ′ is therefore an annulus, since S ′ has genus one. Any component of (S ∩ S ′ ) − K
lies in this annulus. We may arrange that (S ∩ S ′ ) − K is essential in S and S ′ . Thus, if
this intersection is non-empty, it is a collection of parallel essential simple closed curves
in S and S ′ . Since S and S ′ are homologous in V − int(N (K)), the intersection S ∩ S ′
is homologically trivial in S. Hence, we can find adjacent curves of S ∩ S ′ in S which
have opposite orientations, and which bound an annulus A. These are also parallel in
S ′ , although not necessarily adjacent in S ′ , and so we may ambient isotope the annulus
between them in S ′ onto A, and then eliminate these two intersection curves. Thus,
repeating this procedure if necessary, we may arrange that S ′ is disjoint from S.
Now consider the clean product disc D for S. We may arrange that S ′ ∩ D consists
of a single arc that is essential in S ′ and is not parallel in S ′ to α′ . It therefore cuts the
annulus S ′ − int(N (α′ )) into a disc. Perform an ambient isotopy of S ′ that takes S ′ ∩ D
11

into S, and takes α′ into S, but keeps the remainder of the interior of S ′ disjoint from
S. Hence, S ′ − S is the interior of a disc, and similarly S − S ′ is the interior of a disc.
These discs are parallel in V − K, and so there is an ambient isotopy of V , leaving K
fixed, taking S ′ onto S.
5. Non-fibred genus one knots
Proposition 5.1. Let K be a non-fibred knot, with a genus one Seifert surface S.
Then, up to ambient isotopy of S 3 − int(N (S)), it admits at most one essential product
disc.
Proof. Suppose that, on the contrary, there are two non-isotopic essential product discs
D1 and D2 . We may ambient isotope these discs so that each component of D1 ∩ D2 is
an arc running from S− to S+ . Hence, a regular neighbourhood of (∂S × I) ∪ D1 ∪ D2
in S 3 − int(N (S)) is homeomorphic to F × I, for some compact surface F , where F × ∂I
lies in S− ∪ S+ . If some component of ∂F × ∂I bounds a disc in S− or S+ , enlarge F × I
by attaching on a ball D 2 × I. Repeating this as far as possible gives an embedding of
F ′ × I into S 3 − int(N (S)), for some compact surface F ′ , where F ′ × ∂I lies in S− ∪ S+ .
Since S is a once-punctured torus, any two non-isotopic essential arcs in S fill S, in the
sense that the complement of their union is a collection of discs. Hence, F ′ is all of S
and so S 3 − int(N (S)) is homeomorphic to S × I, the homeomorphism taking S− ∪ S+
to S × ∂I. This implies that K is fibred, which is contrary to hypothesis.
Combining this with Theorems 2.1 and 2.3, Remark 2.4 and Proposition 4.1, we
deduce that there is at most one way to unknot a non-fibred genus one knot. Thus, to
complete the proof of Theorem 1.1, we must now consider fibred genus one knots.
6. Fibred genus one knots
There are exactly two fibred genus one knots: the figure-eight knot and the trefoil
[1, Proposition 5.14]. The monodromy of the figure-eight knot is pseudo-Anosov, whereas
the monodromy of the trefoil is periodic. Thus, the fibred case of Theorem 1.1 follows
from Theorems 2.1 and 2.3, Remark 2.4, Propositions 3.1 and 4.1 and the following.
Theorem 6.1. Let h: S → S be an orientation-preserving homeomorphism of the genus
one surface with one boundary component, which is not isotopic to the identity. Then,
up to h-equivalence, there are at most two essential properly embedded arcs α in S such
that α and h(α) can be isotoped to be disjoint. Moreover, if h is periodic, then there is
at most one such arc up to h-equivalence.

12

To prove this, we need to study the arc complex C of S. Recall that this is defined
as follows (see [2] for example). It has a vertex for each ambient isotopy class of properly
embedded essential unoriented arcs in S. A collection of vertices span a simplex if and
only if there are representatives of the associated isotopy classes of arcs that are pairwise
disjoint. The maximal number of disjoint non-parallel essential arcs in S is three, and
hence the complex is 2-dimensional.
There is a one-one correspondence between isotopy classes of properly embedded
essential arcs on S and Q ∪ {∞}. Thus, each properly embedded essential arc has
an associated slope p/q, and conversely each slope determines a unique isotopy class
of properly embedded essential arc. Two distinct slopes p/q and p′ /q ′ (where these
fractions are expressed in their lowest terms) correspond to disjoint arcs if and only if
|pq ′ − qp′ | = 1. Thus, the 1-skeleton of the arc complex is exactly the Farey graph.
Moreover, if one removes the vertices from the complex, the resulting space can be
identified with the hyperbolic plane H2 as follows. If we use the upper-half space model
1
is R ∪ {∞}. We place each vertex of the Farey graph
for H2 , its space at infinity S∞
at the corresponding point of Q ∪ {∞}. We then realise each open 1-simplex of C as a
geodesic. These geodesics divide H2 into ideal triangles. The closure of each such ideal
triangle corresponds to a 2-simplex of C. (See Figure 10.)

∞

-1

∞

∞
-2

0

1

2

3

-1

2

-1/2

3/2

1

0

1/3

1/2

1
1/2

2/3
∞

1

0

0

Figure 10
There is an associated dual complex T , which has a vertex at the centre of each
ideal triangle, and where two vertices are joined by an edge if and only if their associated
ideal triangles share an edge. This complex is a tree.

13

We will also need to collate some information about the link of a vertex v of C.
By applying an automorphism to C, we may assume that v = ∞. The vertices of C
1
− {∞}, and
adjacent to ∞ are precisely the integers. These are ordered around S∞
successive integers are joined by an edge of C. Thus, the link of v in C is a copy of the
real line.
1
1
, then we say
ordered that way around S∞
If x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 are distinct points in S∞
that {x1 , x3 } is interleaved with {x2 , x4 }. Note that if the four points are vertices of the
arc complex C, then it cannot be the case both that x1 and x3 are adjacent in C, and
that x2 and x4 are adjacent in C. This is because the corresponding edges of C would
then intersect at a point in H2 , which is impossible.

Any orientation-preserving homeomorphism h of S induces an automorphism of
H1 (S), and hence is an element of SL(2, Z). The image of this in PSL(2, Z) corresponds
to a Möbius map, which induces an orientation-preserving isometry of H2 . There are
three types of orientation-preserving hyperbolic isometry: elliptic, parabolic and loxodromic. These correspond to the three types of surface automorphism: periodic, reducible (with infinite order) and pseudo-Anosov.
The isometry of H2 leaves T invariant and induces a simplicial automorphism of
C. The automorphism of T either fixes a point or is fixed-point free. In the latter case,
Proposition 24 in [10] implies that the isometry of T has a unique invariant line, known
as the axis of the automorphism. The automorphism acts by translation along this line,
and therefore has infinite order. The case where there is a fixed point in T occurs exactly
when the hyperbolic isometry is elliptic and hence is periodic.
Case 1. h is periodic.
The induced automorphism of T therefore fixes a point in T , which is either a vertex
or a midpoint of an edge. Let us consider first where the fixed point is a vertex of T .
Then, dually, there is an invariant 2-simplex in C. Thus, h induces a rotation of H2
about the centre of the corresponding ideal triangle ∆. We claim that the only properly
embedded essential arcs α on S such that h(α) ∩ α = ∅, up to isotopy, correspond to
1
that is not an ideal
ideal vertices of ∆. To see this, note that, for any point x on S∞
vertex of ∆, {h(x), x} is interleaved with two ideal vertices of ∆. Since the latter form
the endpoints of an edge of C, we deduce that h(x) and x do not. This proves the claim.
Note now that the three vertices of ∆ are all h-equivalent. Hence, Theorem 6.1 is proved
in this case. Suppose now that h fixes a midpoint of an edge e of T that is dual to an
edge e of C. It therefore acts as a rotation about this point. Hence, the only properly
embedded essential arcs α on S such that h(α) ∩ α = ∅, up to isotopy, correspond to
1
− ∂e, {x, h(x)} is interleaved with
endpoints of e. This is because, for any point x ∈ S∞
14

∂e. Thus, x and h(x) cannot be joined by an edge of C. Since the two endpoints of e
are h-equivalent, Theorem 6.1 is proved in the periodic case, and so there is a unique
unknotting crossing change for the trefoil knot.
Case 2. h is reducible and has infinite order.
Then h leaves an essential arc invariant up to isotopy. Thus, the element of SL(2, Z)
is conjugate to


±1 n
,
0 ±1
where n ∈ Z−{0}. If we can establish Theorem 6.1 for an automorphism h: S → S, then
it also holds for any conjugate automorphism. Thus, we may assume that h is given by
the above matrix. It is then easy to see that, up to h-equivalence, the only properly
embedded essential arcs α in S such that h(α) and α can be made disjoint are ∞ and 0,
and that the latter only arises if n = ±1. In particular, Theorem 6.1 holds in this case.
Case 3. h is pseudo-Anosov.
1
cannot be
Then the induced action on H2 is loxodromic. The fixed points on S∞
vertices of C, because h is not reducible. These are the endpoints A− and A+ of the
1
. We may suppose that A− (respectively, A+ ) is the repelling (respectively,
axis A on S∞
attracting) fixed point.

We say that two distinct vertices of C are on the same side of A if they are not
interleaved with the endpoints of A. If x1 and x2 are distinct points on the same side
of A, then we say that x1 < x2 if {x1 , A+ } and {x2 , A− } are interleaved. This is a total
order on points on one side of A, which h preserves.
We say that a vertex v of C is visible from some point x ∈ A, and that x is visible
from v, if x lies on an edge of T that is dual to an edge of C that is incident to v. We say
that v is visible from A if it is visible from some point of A. An equivalent condition is
that some edge emanating from v is dual to an edge of A. Another equivalent condition
is that v is adjacent in C to a vertex that lies on the opposite side of A.
Claim. Suppose that, for some vertex v of C, h(v) and v are adjacent in C. Then, v
is visible from A, and moreover, any vertex of C that is visible from A and that lies on
the same side of A as v is h-equivalent to v.
The claim rapidly implies the theorem. This is because A has only two sides, and
so there are at most two h-equivalence classes of vertices v such that h(v) and v are
adjacent in C.
To prove the first part of the claim, suppose that v is not visible from A. The
1
, and
endpoints of the edges of C emanating from v are arranged in order around S∞
15

successive vertices in this ordering are adjacent in C. Since v is not visible, there are
1
is
two successive vertices v− and v+ such that a cyclic ordering of vertices around S∞
v, v− , A− , A+ , v+ . In other words, v− < v < v+ . Now, h(v+ ) > v+ . Since {v− , v+ }
and {h(v− ), h(v+ )} both form the endpoints of edges, they are not interleaved. Hence,
h(v− ) ≥ v+ . Since v > v− , h(v) > h(v− ) and so h(v) > v+ . Hence, {h(v), v} and
{v− , v+ } are interleaved, and therefore h(v) and v are not adjacent in C. This proves
the first part of the claim.
To prove the second part, we will construct a fundamental domain for the action
of h on A, and will show that the only vertices on the v side of A that are visible from
this fundamental domain are v and h(v). Hence, the only vertices that are visible from
A and that lie on the v side of A are h-equivalent to v.
By the first part of the claim, there is at least one vertex adjacent to v that does
not lie on the same side of A as v. There are only finitely many such vertices, and so
there is one v ′ that is maximal. Let v+ be the vertex incident to both v and v ′ , and that
lies on the v side of A, and which satisfies v < v+ . Now, h(v) cannot be greater than
v+ , for otherwise {h(v), v} and {v+ , v ′ } would be interleaved. Also, h(v) cannot be less
than v+ , since then {h(v), h(v ′ )} and {v, v+ } would be interleaved. Hence, h(v) = v+ .
A

+

h(v')

h(v) = v

+

visible from h(v)

visible from
v'

v and h(v)

v

A

A-

Figure 11
The required fundamental domain in A is the interval that lies between the edge
{v, v ′ } and the edge {h(v), h(v ′ )}. This interval is divided into two sub-intervals by the
edge {h(v), v ′ }. For each point in the first sub-interval, the only visible vertices on the
v side of A are v and h(v). For each point in the second sub-interval, the only visible
vertex on the v side of A is h(v). This proves the claim, and hence the theorem.
Thus, we have proved that there are at most two ways to unknot the figure-eight
knot. This is the last step in the proof of Theorem 1.1.
16

References
1. G. Burde, H. Zieschang, Knots, de Gruyter Studies in Mathematics, 5. Walter
de Gruyter & Co., Berlin, 1985.
2. A. Hatcher, W. Thurston, Incompressible surfaces in 2-bridge knot complements, Invent. Math. 79 (1985) 225–246.
3. M. Lackenby, Exceptional surgery curves in triangulated 3-manifolds, Pacific J.
Math. 210 (2003) 101–163.
4. H. Lyon, Simple knots with unique spanning surfaces, Topology 13 (1974) 275–279.
5. H. Lyon, Simple knots without unique minimal surfaces, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.
43 (1974) 449–454.
6. J. Osoinach, Manifolds obtained by surgery on an infinite number of knots in S 3 ,
Topology 45 (2006) 725–733.
7. P. Ozsváth, Z. Szabó, Knots with unknotting number one and Heegaard Floer
homology. Topology 44 (2005) 705–745.
8. M. Scharlemann, Sutured manifolds and generalized Thurston norms, J. Differential Geom. 29 (1989) 557–614.
9. M. Scharlemann, A. Thompson, Link genus and the Conway moves, Comment.
Math. Helv. 64 (1989) 527–535.
10. J-P. Serre, Arbres, Amalgames, SL2 , Astérisque 46, Soc. Math. France (1977).
11. W. Whitten, Isotopy types of knot spanning surfaces, Topology 12 (1973) 373–
380.
12. R. Wilson, Knots with infinitely many incompressible Seifert surfaces, J. Knot
Theory Ramifications 17 (2008) 537–551.
Mathematics Department, University of California at Davis,
One Shields Avenue, Davis, California 95616, USA
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford,
24-29 St Giles’, Oxford OX1 3LB, United Kingdom.

17

